# WhatsApp's Data Policy Change
This document contains my solution for the "Contemporary Issues" assignment on GitHub. I present responses to two recent newspaper articles about WhatsApp's recently announced policy that will allow data to be shared to parent company Facebook. The first article presents a quite pessimistic view of the situation while the second argues that the situation is not as bad as some believe.

## Article 01 - WhatsApp's Policy Indicates A Shift Towards Less Data Privacy
The Guardian's recent news article "[_*WhatsApp users are really Facebook customers now – it's getting harder to forget that*_](https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2021/jan/11/whatsapp-facebook-app-privacy-policy)" argues that the mobile messaging application's new policy is a call for worry, especially for privacy-concerned users. One of WhatsApp's biggest boons in the past has been that it provided an advertisement-free and secure experience that was far less invasive than Facebook. However, the new policy now indicates that Facebook is looking to now integrate WhatsApp more fully, which will be a source of concern for those against Facebook's practices.

I personally agree with this article's wary view. The greater integration of Facebook with WhatsApp indicates that the Facebook company is strengthening its monopoly on messaging applications (it also owns Instagram and Facebook Messenger). And given how the company has a habit of introducing similar features across different platforms (e.g., stories were gradually introduced on both Instagram and WhatsApp), I am worried that the market will be saturated with identical (or at least very similar) applications that will allow consumers less freedom in terms of the feature sets they desire. This is also likely to discourage the individual applications' divisions from developing unique new features since the applications are going to be uniformized anyways, thereby reducing innovation. On the flip side, as the article suggests, there are alternative applications (e.g., Signal) that consumers are now being encouraged to explore and this might at least help encourage smaller third-party applications to grow a bit.

There is also the problem of less data privacy and security. It is already known that Facebook makes extensive use of targeted advertisements. Though the current policy plan will not share individual chats but will rather only log aggregate data (much in line with the booming trend of big data analysis), it does indicate that Facebook might be looking to data-mine WhatsApp accounts and utilize user behavior from there to serve their own goals. Herein, Facebook's agenda can potentially range from revenue generation to political manipulation. For instance, since Facebook will now possess greater data about its users and because Facebook accounts will be linked to WhatsApp accounts, they might be able to increase their targested advertisements, thereby manipulating markets as well. This idea is further supported by how Facebook is now looking to roll out a "WhatsApp Pay" feature which may give them access to people's debit card and credit card information. Although consumers may be looking to provide such confidential details to WhatsApp, they _*might*_ not be able to do without also sharing the information to Facebook. Given how the Facebook has previously had its databases breached, WhatsApp users also risk their bank accounts being accessed by malicious third-parties.
## Article 02 - WhatsApp Users Will Largely Enjoy The Same Old Experience
In contrast to the first article, Campaign US's writing piece "[_*WhatsApp’s new data policy is not as scary as it sounds for brands or users*_](https://www.campaignlive.com/article/whatsapps-new-data-policy-not-scary-sounds-brands-users/1705677)" takes less of a negative approach and argues that the policy does not really change things for the vast majority of users. Rather, the greater sharing of data is likely to actually improve consumer experience.

While I do think that many WhatsApp users do not need to be concerned about the current policy change since the main feature of chats is still encrypted, the policy does pose a threat for the application's future. It is very much possible that the new policy of sharing user information like contacts is extended to sharing private communications. This can lead to suppression of speech because of the worry that the chats might then be sold or shared for free with third-parties. Though some may argue that such data sharing holds no threat for people who have "nothing to hide," it can be also argued that chats viewed out of context might lead to false/unfair allegations. Furthermore, there is also the moral question of whether a policy change such as this is fair to the user. Although people are free to quit WhatsApp, it is likely to be difficult for many since they might have grown dependent on the platform for many of their communications; it is not easy to just switch to another application when your network and older communications are somewhere else.

However, I also believe that the article has been very right in suggesting that users should research more before they decide whether or not they are going to switch to another competitor like Signal. Increasingly, businesses are utilizing WhatsApp as a business platform, with both real people and bots being used to communicate with current or potential customers. Such enterprises would not be able to utilize other smaller applications for such purposes since they do not currently support such business integration. Herein, business platforms do not need to worry too much about the new policy change because when they initially became involved, they had already consented to sharing data with Facebook. On the consumer side, this data sharing comes at the benefit of personalized consumer service. Therefore, WhatsApp users should consider this niché use case since they might lose out on it by switching. Herein, it becomes clear that consumer purchases are based on a variety of factors and that data privacy is not the only factor at play; rather, people need to individually consider the benefits and costs of any application.